Docs: Vue Router (#43)
vuejs/vue-test-utils-next-docs: src/guide/vue-router.md

## Testing with Vue Router

> Vue Test Utils does not provide any special functions to assist with testing components that rely on Vue Router. This article will present two ways to test an application using Vue Router - using the real Vue Router, which is more production like but also may lead to complexity when testing larger applications, and by using a mock router, allowing for more fine grained control of the testing environment.

Reviewer: I think we should explicitly recommend using the mocked router as well as putting that section first

Author: Yep, we can recommend mocking the router. Regarding the order, my initial idea was to use a real router to show the complexity it introduces to otherwise simple unit tests, then show the solution. I don't have a really strong opinion on the order. I'll rework the article to discuss the mocked solution first.

## With a Real Router

First we will look at a test for a blogging application that uses Vue Router. The posts are listed on the `/posts` route. The components are as follows:

```js
import { mount } from '@vue/test-utils'

> import { createRouter, createWebHistory } from 'vue-router'

Reviewer: I image we could remove these imports here

const App = {
  template: `
    <router-link to="/posts">Go to posts</router-link>
    <router-view />
  `
}

const Posts = {
  template: `
    <h1>Posts</h1>
    <ul>
      <li v-for="posts in posts" :key="post.id">
        {{ post.name }}
      </li>
    </ul>
  `,
  data() {
    return {
      posts: [{ id: 1, name: 'Testing Vue Router' }]
    }
  }
}
```

> The root of the app, `/`, displays a `<router-link>` leading to `/posts`, where we list the posts in an unordered list.

Reviewer: The root of the app is not associated with a path, so I think we should omit the ``, `/`,`` part

        template: 'Welcome to the blogging app'
      }
    },
    {
      path: '/posts',
      component: Posts
    }
  ]
})
```

The best way to illustrate how to test an app using Vue Router is to let the warnings guide us. The following minimal test is enough to get us going:

```js
import { mount } from '@vue/test-utils'
import { createRouter, createWebHistory } from 'vue-router'

test('routing', () => {
  const wrapper = mount(App)
  expect(wrapper.html()).toContain('Welcome to the blogging app')
})
```

The test fails. It also prints two warnings:

```sh
console.warn node_modules/@vue/runtime-core/dist/runtime-core.cjs.js:39
  [Vue warn]: Failed to resolve component: router-link
    at <Anonymous ref="VTU_COMPONENT" >
    at <VTUROOT>

console.warn node_modules/@vue/runtime-core/dist/runtime-core.cjs.js:39
  [Vue warn]: Failed to resolve component: router-view
    at <Anonymous ref="VTU_COMPONENT" >
    at <VTUROOT>
```

The `<router-link>` and `<router-view>` component are not found. We need to install Vue Router! Since Vue Router is a plugin, we install it using the `global.plugins` mounting option:

```js {6,7,8}
import { mount } from '@vue/test-utils'

> import { createRouter, createWebHistory } from 'vue-router'

Reviewer: The router is referring to the instance created before.

I think to make it clearer, we should show a bit of the router instance:

```js
const router = createRouter({
  // options omitted for brevity
})
```

or a different comment that sounds better in English

test('routing', () => {
  const wrapper = mount(App, {
    global: {
      plugins: [router]
    }
  })
  expect(wrapper.html()).toContain('Welcome to the blogging app')
})
```

Those two warnings are now gone - but now we have another warning:

```js
console.warn node_modules/vue-router/dist/vue-router.cjs.js:225
  [Vue Router warn]: Unexpected error when starting the router: TypeError: Cannot read property '_history' of null
```

> Although it's not entirely clear from the warning, it's related to the fact that Vue Router 4 handles routing asynchronously, and before anything is rendered, the router must be in a "ready" state. For this reason Vue Router provides an `isReady` function, which we can `await` to ensure the router is ready and the initial routing has occurred before rendering anything.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although it's not entirely clear from the warning, it's related to the fact that Vue Router 4 handles routing asynchronously, and before anything is rendered, the router must be in a "ready" state. For this reason Vue Router provides an `isReady` function, which we can `await` to ensure the router is ready and the initial navigation has finished before rendering anything.
```

> Furthermore, the jsdom environment most test runners use will not do an initial navigation to `/` like a regular browser, so we need to handle this ourselves.  Update the test to do the initial navigation to `/`, and ensure the navigation has completed by awaiting `isReady`:

Reviewer: hmm, I don't think this is true. In web mode, the router will use the current location to trigger an initial navigation automatically. That's why we need the `isReady` call. If instead of using the web history, we use the Memory History, what you say is true, **we need to trigger** the initial navigation. And awaiting both the `push` or `isReady` is the same (but it's better to await `isReady` for consistency)

```js {5,6}
import { mount } from '@vue/test-utils'
import { createRouter, createWebHistory } from 'vue-router'

test('routing', () => {
  router.push('/')
  await router.isReady()
  const wrapper = mount(App, {
    global: {
      plugins: [router]
    }
  })
  expect(wrapper.html()).toContain('Welcome to the blogging app')
})
```

> The test is now passing! If this seems like a lot of work for such a simple, that's because is it. There is an ongoing discussion to include [some helpers](https://github.com/vuejs/vue-test-utils-next/issues/152) to simplify this, but either way, it can be useful to know how things work internally.

Reviewer: I think we should agree on something there before posting this docs haha
Ideally, there should be no reference to an ongoing discussion making this look like a WIP (even though there is never a final doc version that doesn't improve!)

Author: I will remove the reference to the VTU issue for now. I thought it would be good to have *something* documented so people can at least have some guidance (the async routing was a little confusing for me at first, I'm sure for others, too).

We should definitely provide some utils. I will try to get some momentum going. I do think there is value in explaining how things work "under the hood" as well (maybe a blog post is better than official docs for that, though).

Now the initial setup has been handled, let's navigate to `/posts` and make an assertion to ensure the routing is working as expected:

```js {14,15}
import { mount } from '@vue/test-utils'
import { createRouter, createWebHistory } from 'vue-router'

test('routing', async () => {

>   router.push('/')

Reviewer: The reason you need this push is because the initial navigation happens when we add the router plugin.

The reason the navigation is delayed until plugin installation is to allow the user setup navigation guards before the router triggers that initial navigation.

  await wrapper.find('a').trigger('click')
  expect(wrapper.html()).toContain('Testing Vue Router')
})
```

Again, another somewhat cryptic error:

```js
console.warn node_modules/@vue/runtime-core/dist/runtime-core.cjs.js:39
  [Vue warn]: Unhandled error during execution of native event handler
    at <RouterLink to="/posts" >
    at <Anonymous ref="VTU_COMPONENT" >
    at <VTUROOT>

console.error node_modules/@vue/runtime-core/dist/runtime-core.cjs.js:211
  TypeError: Cannot read property '_history' of null
```

Again, due to Vue Router 4's new asynchronous nature, we need to `await` the routing to complete before making any assertions. In this case, however, there is not `router.hasNavigated` hook we can await on. One alternative is to use the `flushPromises` function exported from Vue Test Utils:

```js {2,15}
import { mount } from '@vue/test-utils'
import { createRouter, createWebHistory } from 'vue-router'

test('routing', async () => {
  router.push('/')
  await router.isReady()
  const wrapper = mount(App, {
    global: {
      plugins: [router]
    }
  })
  expect(wrapper.html()).toContain('Welcome to the blogging app')

  await wrapper.find('a').trigger('click')

>   await flushPromises()

Reviewer: nice, I didn't know this worked in this scenario! It still works only because there are no navigation guards. This is where having those extra router test utils would be useful. Overall I think we need a router mock (https://github.com/vuejs/vue-test-utils-next/issues/152) that exposes utility functions like a `await router.hasNavigated()`

There could still be a function that takes a router instance to wrap the helpers around it: `createRouteMock(router)` or something similar. I also think it's worth if this kind of behavior could be automatic in test utils to make the end experience smoother

  expect(wrapper.html()).toContain('Testing Vue Router')
})
```

It *finally* passes. Great! This is all very manual, however - and this is for a tiny, trivial app. Is there an alternative?

## Using a Mock Router

> You can use a mock router, instead, to avoid caring about the implementation details of Vue Router in your unit tests. Instead of using Vue Router, we can just create our own minimal mock version which only implements the features we are interested in. We can do this using a combination of `jest.mock` (if you are using Jest), and `global.components`.

Reviewer: I really think we should provide an official mock and not let the user do it. This is something I can do myself or we can collaboratively build. I think we should go through an RFC after https://github.com/vuejs/vue-test-utils-next/issues/152 to setup the API and that we could first go through the API internally

Author: Sure, let's do it. If you have some ideas feel free to work on something! If I can find some time in the next week or so I will try to work on something too.

> When we mock out a dependency, it's usually because we are not interested in testing that dependencies behavior. In this case, we do not want to test clicking `<router-link>` (which is really just an `<a>` tag) navigates to the correct page - of course it does! In this example, we might be interested in ensuring that the `<a>` has the correct `to` attribute, though. This may seem trivial, but in a larger application with much more complex routing, it can be worth ensuring links are correct (especially if they are highly dynamic).

Reviewer: IMO one of the most important things is: we don't want to trigger global navigation guards. This makes me think it would be nice to allow ignoring in-component navigation guards (when testing a page component) by passing an option somewhere in the router test utils

```js
describe('component handles routing correctly', () => {
  it('allows authenticated user to edit a post', () => {
    const mockRoute = {
      params: {
        id: 1
      }
    }
    const mockRouter = {
      push: jest.fn()
    }
    const wrapper = mount(Component, {
      props: {
        authenticated: true,
      },
      global: {
        mocks: {
          $route: mockRoute,
          $router: mockRouter
        }
      }
    })

    wrapper.find('button').trigger('click')

    expect(mockRouter.push).toHaveBeenCalledWith('/posts/1/edit')
  })

  it('redirect an unauthenticated user to 404', () => {

>     // Try writing this yourself! It's a good exercise. You can reuse most of the above test.

Author: I will add the other test
